Add new tutorial for deciphering viral populations using SNV and baculovirus isolates (Variant analysis) (#5700)
galaxyproject/training-material: topics/variant-analysis/tutorials/baculovirus-isolate-variation/tutorial.md

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on

title: Deciphering Virus Populations - Single Nucleotide Variants (SNVs) and Specificities in Baculovirus Isolates

> subtopic: ''

Reviewer: ```suggestion
subtopic: 'one-health'
```

Maybe?

Author: Yes it is ok, although I think that the One Heatlh description ("Variant calling for monitoring and preventing health threats") is not very fitting.

zenodo_link: ''
level: Intermediate
questions:
- How can the genetic variability of a baculovirus isolate be analysed?
- How can single nucleotide variants (SNV) be identified across multiple isolates?
- How can SNV be used as markers to analyse the composition of baculovirus populations?
objectives:
- Understand the significance of single nucleotide variants (SNVs) in baculovirus populations.
- Determine variable SNV positions for multiple isolates using a common reference genome.

> - Transform the output (VCF file) to a readable table format using tools available at Galaxy only. 
> - Interpret the SNV data to analysis the intra-isolate variability of baculovirus isolates or samples.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Transform the output (VCF file) to a readable table format
- Interpret the SNV data to analyse the intra-isolate variability of baculovirus isolates or samples.
```

Not sure if the transform step is really an objective.

- Learn to create your own sequence data and analyse it using the provided workflow and tool to explore the genetic variation of baculovirus populations.

> time_estimation: 2H

Author: My student, a total beginner did it in about 2 hours. Changed time estimation value to 3H. Should be a solid and optimistic estimate.

abbreviations:
    CpGV: Cydia pomonella granulovirus
    NCBI: National Center for Biotechnology Information
    ORF: open reading frame
    SNV: Single nucleotide variant
    SRA: Sequence Read Archive
key_points:

> - Baculovirus populations are heterogeneous and show genetic variability.

Reviewer 2: You are mostly talking about isolates, but sometimes also about populations or samples.
I realize the terminology around the concept may be the source of endless debates, but maybe you could reserve a small paragraph in the introduction for explaining what an isolate is in the context here and why it can be a mix of things.

Author: That is indeed a very important and correct critic, which I have of course addressed. The use of sample and isolate arose from the fact that in the VCF file the columns with the data sets are called ‘sample columns’ (SAMPLE). In an earlier version, I have tried to take this into account (which then led to chaos). I have now consistently used the correct nomenclature isolate and also adapted all steps, outputs, codes and the workflow to it. Population is now defined in the introduction but is no longer used so much in the text.

> - Some SNV positions occur only in certain isolates and are therefore specific for that isolate.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Some SNV positions occur only in certain isolates and are therefore specific to that isolate.
```

- SNV specificities can be used as markers to identify isolates and determine mixtures.

> contributors:

Reviewer: You can extend this for example by:

contributions:
  authorship:
    - wennj
  editing:
    - your-student

Author: She is not on Github.

- wennj

---

# Introduction

> Baculoviruses of the family *Baculoviridae* ({% cite Harrison2018 %}) are one of the most intensively 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Baculoviruses of the family *Baculoviridae* ({% cite Harrison2018 %}) are among the most intensively 
```

studied viruses, not only because of their widespread application in biotechnology, medicine, and 
agriculture ({% cite vanOers2007 %}). Like all members of the class *Naldaviricetes*, 

> baculoviruses have a circular large dsDNA genome that, in the family *Baculoviridae*, 
> ranges between 90 to 180 kbp and can encode up to 180 open reading frames (ORF). 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
baculoviruses have large circular dsDNA genomes that, in the family *Baculoviridae*, 
range from 90 to 180 kbp and can encode up to 180 open reading frames (ORFs). 
```

A detailed description of the biology of the Baculoviridae family can be found in the
official report of the International Committee on Taxonomy of Viruses (ICTV) ({% cite Harrison2018 %}). A detailed summary can also be found on the website of the ICTV (https://ictv.global/).

> <comment-title> A Baculovirus Genome </comment-title>
>
> The genome of the isolate Autographa californica multiple nucleopolyhedrovirus isolate C6 (AcMNPV-C6)
> (family *Baculoviridae*, genus *Alphabaculovirus*, species *Alphabaculovirus aucalifornicae*) is one of the 
> best-studied baculovirus genomes and is 133,894 bp long ({% cite Ayres1994 %}). 

> > It is the first fully sequenced genon of baculoviruses and today hundreds of genomes are fully sequenced

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> It is the first fully sequenced genome of baculoviruses and today hundreds of genomes are fully sequenced
```

> and publically available at NCBI Genbank. The genome of AcMNPV-C6 encodes for 154 open reading frames (ORF)
> in both forward and reverse orientation (see figure). 
> So far, 38 ORFs were identified, which are encoded by all baculoviruses sequenced to date and are 
> called baculovirus core genes. In addition to the core genes, genes were found 
> that are encoded by baculoviruses from the genera *Alphabaculovirus* and *Betabaculovirus*. 
> 
> ![Alternative text](https://ictv.global/sites/default/files/inline-images/7651.ODD.Baculo.Fig2.v2.png "Figure: Schematic representation of the AcMNPV-C6 genome. ORFs and their orientation are indicated by arrows. (Figure from {% cite ICTV_AcMNPV_genome_figure %})")
>
{: .comment}

> The genome size makes it difficult to study genetic variation within a baculovirus population, 
> especially since the most commonly used sequencing technique (Illumina sequencing) 
> generates only short reads and requires genome assembly. Since genome assembly generates 
> a consensus sequence that reflects the majority of a sequenced virus population, 
> occuring genetic variation is masked. Tools for haplotype-sensitive assembly are 
> available but so far have been establisehd for viruses with a relatively short genome 
> but not for baculoviruses or other large dsDNA viruses (REFERENCES). Using Nanopore sequencing, 
> it is possible to sequence signficiant fragments of  baculovirus genomes to determine major 
> haplotypes ({% cite Wennmann2024 %}). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The genome size makes it difficult to study genetic variation within a baculovirus population, 
especially since the most commonly used sequencing technique (Illumina sequencing) 
generates only short reads and requires genome assembly. Since genome assembly generates 
a consensus sequence that reflects the majority of a sequenced virus population, 
occurring genetic variation is masked. Tools for haplotype-sensitive assembly are 
available but so far have been established for viruses with a relatively short genome 
but not for baculoviruses or other large dsDNA viruses (REFERENCES). Using Nanopore sequencing, 
it is possible to sequence significant fragments of baculovirus genomes to determine major 
haplotypes ({% cite Wennmann2024 %}). 
```

Author: Suggestions were changed manually.

> Single nucleotide variants (SNV) have been proven as a powerful tool for analyzing 
> the genetic variability of sequenced baculovirus isolates ({% cite Fan2020 %}). SNV 
> are particularly useful for the analysis of intra-isolate or intra-sample specific 
> variation, as a many bioinformatic workflows and tools are established for SNV determination 
> and processing. For the identification of SNVs, Illumina sequencing data is mostly used, 
> as this sequencing technique provides highly accurate reads with a very low probability 
> of sequencing error. The data is usually provided and stored in fatsq or fastqsanger format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Single nucleotide variants (SNV) have been proven as a powerful tool for analyzing 
the genetic variability of sequenced baculovirus isolates ({% cite Fan2020 %}). SNV 
are particularly useful for the analysis of intra-isolate or intra-sample specific 
variation, as many bioinformatic workflows and tools are established for SNV determination 
and processing. For the identification of SNVs, Illumina sequencing data is mostly used, 
as this sequencing technique provides highly accurate reads with a very low probability 
of sequencing error. The data is usually provided and stored in FASTQ or FASTQsanger format.
```

> When a baculovirus sample or isolate is sequenced, a dataset of sequence reads is 
> obtained that consists of a multitude of fragmented genomes and the excact reconstruction 
> of individual whole genomes is no longer possible. However, variable SNV positions can 
> be used as markers to count the frequency of the nucleotides that occur in the SNV positions. 
> The determination of the nucleotides is only possible because not one but many genomes 
> were sequenced. Therefor, the SNVs reflect the genetic variability of the virus population itself. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a baculovirus sample or isolate is sequenced, a dataset of sequence reads is 
obtained that consists of a multitude of fragmented genomes and the exact reconstruction 
of individual whole genomes is no longer possible. However, variable SNV positions can 
be used as markers to count the frequency of the nucleotides that occur in the SNV positions. 
The determination of the nucleotides is only possible because not one but many genomes 
were sequenced. Therefore, the SNVs reflect the genetic variability of the virus population itself. 
```

Although deletions and insertions can also occur, these are not covered in this tutorial.

When multiple baculovirus isolates have been sequenced, SNV positions can be determined 
that are specific to only certain isolates. These specific SNV markers can then be used 

> to identify and isolate based on sequencing data only, even when the isolate is present 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
to identify an isolate based on sequencing data only, even when the isolate is present 
```

in a mixture with other isolates. To enable this identification of baculovirus isolates, 
SNV positions must be determined across multiple isolates using a common reference sequence. 
This reference serves as an anchor for the detected SNV positions and must be chosen with care. 
Based on the reference and the SNVs, SNV specificities can be determined for individual isolates.

The tutorial presented here aims to explain...
- the criteria for a suitable reference genome,
- a workflow that can be used to call SNVs across multiple sequenced baculovirus isolates,
- what is meant by SNV specificities and
- how to determine the composition of an isolate based on other previously sequenced baculovirus isolates.

The workflow is based on sequencing data from the Cydia pomonella granulovirus (CpGV) 
(family *Baculoviridae*, genus *Betabaculovirus*). CpGV is used commercially in agriculture 

> for the biological control the larvae of the codling moth (*Cydia pomonella*), which cause 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
for the biological control of larvae of the codling moth (*Cydia pomonella*), which cause 
```

> significant losses to  fruit crops, such als apple and pear.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
significant losses to fruit crops, such as apples and pears.
```

> <agenda-title></agenda-title>
>
> In this tutorial, we will cover:
>
> 1. TOC
> {:toc}
>
{: .agenda}

# Dataset Preparation

Let's start at the very beginning with a new history and a detailed description 
of the sequencing datasets as well as the reference sequence. 
We will also have a closer look at the Illumina sequencing datasets, what we 
know so far about them and what we can expect from the analysis. By doing this, 
we will work our way towards our goal step by step.

> <hands-on-title>Prepare the Galaxy history</hands-on-title>
>
> 1. Create a new history for this analysis
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/histories_create_new.md %}
>
> 2. Rename the history
>
>    {% snippet faqs/galaxy/histories_rename.md %}
>
{: .hands_on}

## Reference Genome from NCBI Genbank

> Selecting the right or most suitable reference sequence is important if not critical for the entire analysis. The referen genome used in this tutorial is the Cydia pomonella granulovirus (Mexican isolate, CpGV-M). The function of the reference is to act as an anchor point to link detected SNV position in all sequenced and analyzed isolates. Selecting a correct reference genome is critical, because it must be as closely related as possible to the sequenced samples/isolates. Therefore, it is best to use a reference from the same species that has been well analyzed by previous studies or the scientific community.  The following step will download the NCBI Accession Number `KM217575`, which corresponds to the `Cydia pomonella granulovirus isolate CpGV-M, complete genome`. It will later serve as the reference genome for the detection of SNV positions.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Selecting the right or most suitable reference sequence is important if not critical for the entire analysis. The reference genome used in this tutorial is the Cydia pomonella granulovirus (Mexican isolate, CpGV-M). The function of the reference is to act as an anchor point to link detected SNV positions in all sequenced and analyzed isolates. Selecting a correct reference genome is critical because it must be as closely related as possible to the sequenced samples/isolates. Therefore, it is best to use a reference from the same species that has been well analyzed by previous studies or the scientific community.  The following step will download the NCBI Accession Number `KM217575`, which corresponds to the `Cydia pomonella granulovirus isolate CpGV-M, complete genome`. It will later serve as the reference genome for the detection of SNV positions.  
```

>    {: .comment}
>
> 3. {% tool [Replace Text in entire line](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/bgruening/text_processing/tp_replace_in_line/9.3+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"File to process"*: `output` (output of **Collapse Collection** {% icon tool %})
>    - In *"Replacement"*:
>         - *"Find pattern"*: `^>.*$`
>         - *"Replace with:"*: `>CpGV-M `
>    - Click Run Tool
>
>    > <comment-title> What the tool does... </comment-title>
>    > The find pattern `^>.*$` searches for the `>` and all characters that follow.
>    > Then everything (the entire line) is replaced by `>CpGV-M`. 
>    {: .comment}
>
>    > <comment-title> Why we change the name... </comment-title>
>    > The reference genome is stored in a single file in FASTA format. After downloading from NCBI, the name of the reference is `>KM217575.1 Cydia pomonella granulovirus isolate CpGV-M, complete genome`. The name is very long and can cause issues during later analysis (in R or Python). Therefore, I recommend to replace the name with the **Replace text in entire line** tool.
>    {: .comment}
>
{: .hands_on}

> ## Paired-end Sequencing Data from NCBI SRA
> 
> The tutorial is based on Illumina data sets from several isolates of the Cydia pomonella granulovirus (CpGV). 
> The CpGV is one of the most well studied baculoviruses because many isolates have been sequenced and sequence 
> data sets are available at NCBI Genbank and NCBI SRA. We will use four CpGV isolates to decipher their 
> intra-isolate specific variation and try to draw conclusios about the isolate's homogenity or heterogenity. 
> We will also encounter a mixed isolate (a more or less clean mixture of other previously sequenced CpGV isoaltes) 
> and learn how to recognize it. In addition, we will learn how to determine the composition 
> of this mixted isolate based on other sequenced CpGV isolates.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Paired-end Sequencing Data from NCBI SRA

The tutorial is based on Illumina data sets from several isolates of the Cydia pomonella granulovirus (CpGV). 
The CpGV is one of the most well-studied baculoviruses because many isolates have been sequenced and sequence 
data sets are available at NCBI Genbank and NCBI SRA. We will use four CpGV isolates to decipher their 
intra-isolate specific variation and try to draw conclusions about the isolate's homogeneity or heterogeneity. 
We will also encounter a mixed isolate (a more or less clean mixture of other previously sequenced CpGV isolates) 
and learn how to recognize it. In addition, we will learn how to determine the composition 
of this mixed isolate based on other sequenced CpGV isolates.

```

> <comment-title> Detailed CpGV Isolate Information </comment-title>
>
> For those who want to delve deeper into the data sets, I have provided a table with links to NCBI SRA and related publications.
>
> | Isolate | NCBI Genbank | NCBI SRA | Reference |
> |:------------------:|:------------------:|:------------------:|:------------------:|
> | CpGV-M | KM217575 | [SRR31589148](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces?run=SRR31589148) | [Wennmann et al. 2020](https://doi.org/10.3390/v12060625) |
> | CpGV-S | KM217573 | [SRR31589147](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces?run=SRR31589147) | [Wennmann et al. 2020](https://doi.org/10.3390/v12060625) |
> | CpGV-E2 | KM217577 | [SRR31589146](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces?run=SRR31589146) | [Gueli Alletti et al. 2017](https://doi.org/10.3390/v9090250) |
> | CpGV-V15 | No assembly available | [SRR31679023](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/sra/SRX27041396) | [Fan et al. 2020](https://doi.org/10.1093/ve/veaa073) |
{: .comment}

Follow the steps below to download the four Illumina datasets published at NCBI SRA.

> <hands-on-title>NCBI SRA Data Download</hands-on-title>
>

> >    Run {% tool [Download and Extract Reads in FASTAQ format from NCBI SRA](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/sra_tools/fastq_dump/3.1.1+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>    Run {% tool [Download and Extract Reads in FASTQ format from NCBI SRA](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/sra_tools/fastq_dump/3.1.1+galaxy1) %} with the following parameters:
```

>
>    - *"Select input type"*: `SRR accession`
>    - *Accession*: `SRR31589146, SRR31589147, SRR31589148, SRR31679023`
>    - *Select output format*: `gzip compressed fastq`
>    - Click Run Tool
>
>    > <comment-title> Take a cup of coffee </comment-title>
>    > Downloading the data from NCBI SRA may take a while.
>    > It is a good opportunity to have a cup of coffee or tea.
>    {: .comment}
>
{: .hands_on}

# Read Preprocessing and Quality Control

After the reference genome and the paired-end Illumina reads are loaded in the history, 

> it is time to start the analysis. First, the reads needs to be adapter trimmed and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it is time to start the analysis. First, the reads need to be adapter trimmed and
```

quality filtered. 

> <tip-title>Learn more about quality of reads!</tip-title>
> Before and after trimming, it is usually a good idea to check the quality of the reads using FASTQC. 

> > Howver, we will omit this step here. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> However, we will omit this step here. 
```

> If you are interested in learning more about read quality, I recommend the check the [Galaxy Training Quality Control]( {% link topics/sequence-analysis/tutorials/quality-control/tutorial.md %} ) tutorial.
{: .tip}

> <hands-on-title> Task description </hands-on-title>
>
> 1. {% tool [Trim Galore!](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/bgruening/trim_galore/trim_galore/0.6.7+galaxy0) %} with the following parameters:
>    - *"Is this library paired- or single-end?"*: `Paired Collection`

> >        - {% icon param-collection %} *"Select a paired collection"*: `output` (output of **Download and Extract Reads in FASTAQ format from NCBI SRA** {% icon tool %})

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>        - {% icon param-collection %} *"Select a paired collection"*: `Paired-end data (fastq-dump)` (output of **Download and Extract Reads in FASTAQ format from NCBI SRA** {% icon tool %})
```

In general,  in the GTN we are not using a tool's output name (as defined in the tool wrapper), but the user facing label of the generated dataset if that is a nice one, or a label-like description of the dataset. Take a look at https://training.galaxyproject.org/training-material/topics/evolution/tutorials/mtb_transmission/tutorial.html as an example, then change most of your hands-on boxes accordingly.

Author: I suspected something is wrong, but thought the output names were because of the planemo (ptdk). Anyway, I've adjusted everything and it's much more logical now.

>    {: .comment}
>
> 2. {% tool [bcftools call](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/iuc/bcftools_call/bcftools_call/1.15.1+galaxy5) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"VCF/BCF Data"*: `output_file` (output of **bcftools mpileup** {% icon tool %})
>    - In *"Restrict to"*:
>        - *"Regions"*: `Do not restrict to Regions`
>    - In *"Consensus/variant calling Options"*:
>        - *"Calling method"*: `Multiallelic and rare-variant caller`
>            - *"Constrain"*: `Do not constrain`
>                - *"Targets"*: `Do not restrict to Targets`
>    - In *"File format Options"*:
>        - *"Regions"*: `Do not restrict to Regions`
>    - In *"Input/output Options"*:
>        - *"Keep alts"*: `Yes`
>        - *"Output variant sites only"*: `Yes`
>    - *"Output type"*: `uncompressed VCF`
>    - Click Run Tool
>
>    > <comment-title> What bcftools call does... </comment-title>
>    > bcftools call performs the actual variant detection. It removes non variant and keeps variant sites only.
>    {: .comment}
>
{: .hands_on}

> What you get is a file in Variant Call Format (VCF), which can be difficult to understand at first glance. It is important to note that the file begins with a large header, lines that begin with two hashtags (##), which contain details of the analysis and the data set. After the header, there is a table with a line that contains the column names. This line begins with just one hashtag (#). After that, the results are displayed in a tab-separated format. In our VCF example, some columns have the following abbreviations and meaning (I just select a few that are important to us in this tutorial):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
What you get is a file in Variant Call Format (VCF), which can be difficult to understand at first glance. It is important to note that the file begins with a large header, lines that begin with two hashtags (##), which contain details of the analysis and the data set. After the header, there is a table with a line that contains the column names. This line begins with just one hashtag (#). After that, the results are displayed in a tab-separated format. In our VCF example, some columns have the following abbreviations and meanings (I just selected a few that are important to us in this tutorial):
```

|**SRR31589146**   |1st sample column: The results for the sequence data SRR31589146 in the format specified in FORMAT.   |
|**SRR31589147**   |2nd sample column: The results for the sequence data SRR31589147 in the format specified in FORMAT.   |
|**SRR31589148**   |3rd sample column: The results for the sequence data SRR31589148 in the format specified in FORMAT.   |
|**SRR31679023**   |4th sample column: The results for the sequence data SRR31679023 in the format specified in FORMAT.   |

To understand how the data is stored, we have to look at FORMAT in detail. This is where two values are of great importance: DP and DPR.

|Genotype&nbsp;field|Description   |
|---:|:---|
|**DP**   |Read depth (number of nucleotides) at this position for this sample.   |
|**DPR**   |The read depth for each allele. Here, the first value corresponds to the reference nucleotide (REF), the second to the first possible allele (ALT1), the second to the second possible allele (ALT2) and the third value to the last possible allele (ALT3).

> <comment-title>DPR functional, but deprecated</comment-title>

> > If you start **bcftools mpileup** with the *Optional tags to output* `DPR (Number of high quality bases for each observed allele)` option, you will see a warning in the information panel of the VCF file: `[warning] tag DPR functional, but deprecated. Please switch to AD in future`. At the time of writing this tutorial, I was using DPR. It works the same way with *Optional tags to output* option `AD` (instead of DPR), but you will need to adjust something later in the workflow. The tutorial will be switched to AD in the near future. For now, we stick with DPR.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> If you start **bcftools mpileup** with the *Optional tags to output* `DPR (Number of high-quality bases for each observed allele)` option, you will see a warning in the information panel of the VCF file: `[warning] tag DPR functional but deprecated. Please switch to AD in future. At the time of writing this tutorial, I was using DPR. It works the same way with *Optional tags to output* option `AD` (instead of DPR), but you will need to adjust something later in the workflow. The tutorial will be switched to AD in the near future. For now, we stick with DPR.
```

|CHROM   |POS   |DP   |DPR           | ALT1  |ALT2    |ALT3  |  
|:------:|:----:|:---:|:------------:|:-----:|:------:|:----:|
|CpGV-M  |246   |886  |107,773,6,0   |773    |6       |0     |

If we now divide the absolute frequencies of `ALT1 = 773`, `ALT2 = 6` and `ALT3 = 0` by `DP = 886`, we get the relative frequencies (`REL.ALT`):

|ALLELE     |REL.ALT     |
|:---------:|:----------:|
|ALT1       |0.87246     |
|ALT2       |0.00677201  |
|ALT3       |0           |

> <hands-on-title> Transfrom VCF to tab-deliminated table </hands-on-title>
>
> 1. {% tool [VCFtoTab-delimited:](toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/repos/devteam/vcf2tsv/vcf2tsv/1.0.0_rc1+galaxy0) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Select VCF dataset to convert"*: `output_file` (output of **bcftools call** {% icon tool %})
>    - *"Fill empty fields with"*: `NULL`
>    - Click Run Tool
>
>    > <comment-title> An easier-to-read table </comment-title>

> >    > This tool creates a table from the VCF file. The columns are tab-deliminated. Take a look at table and see if it is now easier to read. It can also be imported to R/RStudio/Excel more easily.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
>    > This tool creates a table from the VCF file. The columns are tab-delimited. Take a look at the table and see if it is now easier to read. It can also be imported to R/RStudio/Excel more easily.
```

| CpGV-M | 246 | C   | A   | SRR31589146 | 886 | 107,773,6,0 | ALT3   | 0          | 0          | 0            |
| CpGV-M | 246 | C   | T   | SRR31589147 | 881 | 5,875,1,0   | ALT1   | 875        | 0.99319    | 0.994305     |
| CpGV-M | 246 | C   | G   | SRR31589147 | 881 | 5,875,1,0   | ALT2   | 1          | 0.00113507 | 0            |
| CpGV-M | 246 | C   | A   | SRR31589147 | 881 | 5,875,1,0   | ALT3   | 0          | 0          | 0            |
| CpGV-M | 246 | C   | T   | SRR31589148 | 935 | 800,133,1,1 | ALT1   | 133        | 0.142246   | 0.142398     |
| CpGV-M | 246 | C   | G   | SRR31589148 | 935 | 800,133,1,1 | ALT2   | 1          | 0.00106952 | 0            |
| CpGV-M | 246 | C   | A   | SRR31589148 | 935 | 800,133,1,1 | ALT3   | 1          | 0.00106952 | 0            |
| CpGV-M | 246 | C   | T   | SRR31679023 | 839 | 42,797,0,0  | ALT1   | 797        | 0.94994    | 0.950296     |
| CpGV-M | 246 | C   | G   | SRR31679023 | 839 | 42,797,0,0  | ALT2   | 0          | 0          | 0            |
| CpGV-M | 246 | C   | A   | SRR31679023 | 839 | 42,797,0,0  | ALT3   | 0          | 0          | 0            |

## Replace SRA Names with Virus Abbreviations

> One thing that stands out are the SAMPLE names, which were taken automatically from the NCBI SRA datasets. Since it is difficult to remember which virus isolate is behind which SRA number, we can replace the accession numbers with proper names. This makes the table even easier to read and later we can use the information directly to display the SNV positions. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One thing that stands out is the SAMPLE names, which were taken automatically from the NCBI SRA datasets. Since it is difficult to remember which virus isolate is behind which SRA number, we can replace the accession numbers with proper names. This makes the table even easier to read and later we can use the information directly to display the SNV positions. 
```

> <hands-on-title>Keep only ALT1 and remove ALT2 and ALT3</hands-on-title>
>
> 1. {% tool [Filter data on any column using simple expressions](Filter1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Filter"*: `outfile` (output of **Replace Text in a specific column** {% icon tool %})
>    - *"With following condition"*: `c30=='ALT1'`
>    - *"Numbers of header ines to skip"*: `1`
>    - Click Run Tool
>
>    > <question-title>Mainly two nucleotides only in vairable SNV positions?</question-title>
>    > Think about an option how the occurance of one, two, three or four nucleotides per SNV position can be analyzed.   

> >    {: .comment}

Reviewer 2: Can you improve the wording of  this question? It's not easy to understand.

Author: The question was indeed poorly worded. I have revised it complety. Now the reader should not be completely lost.

>
>    > <warning-title>Be careful when removing data!</warning-title>  
>    > The data sets used here have already been analysed extensively and for this tutorial only the first alternative nucleotide (allele) is sufficient to explain the further workflow. Always be sure what you are doing when you remove data! Always ask yourself if you are allowed to do it and what the consequences might be. 
>    {: .warning}
>
{: .hands_on}

# Visualizing SNV Variability Across Isolates

> The final table should be much easier to read and contain all the information we need to perform an analysis of the intra-isolate specific variability. Here is an short overview about the final table (selected columns) and its first three SNV positions:  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The final table should be much easier to read and contain all the information we need to perform an analysis of the intra-isolate specific variability. Here is a short overview of the final table (selected columns) and its first three SNV positions:  
```

>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Input in tabular format"*: `out_file1` (output of **Filter** {% icon tool %})
>    - *"Column to plot on x-axis"*: `2`
>    - *"Column to plot on y-axis"*: `32`
>    - *"Plot title"*: `SNV plot`
>    - *"Label for x axis"*: `Reference Genome Position of CpGV-M`
>    - *"Label for y axis"*: `Relative nucleotide frequency `
>    - In *"Advanced options"*:
>        - *"Type of plot"*: `Points only (default)`
>            - *"Data point options"*: `Default`
>        - *"Plotting multiple groups"*: `Plot multiple groups of data on individual plots`
>            - *"column differentiating the different groups"*: `25`
>        - *"Axis title options"*: `Default`
>        - *"Axis text options"*: `Default`
>        - *"Plot title options"*: `Default`
>        - *"Grid lines"*: `Hide major and minor grid lines`
>        - *"Axis scaling"*: `Automatic axis scaling`
>    - In *"Output Options"*:
>        - *"Unit of output dimensions"*: `Centimeters (cm)`
>        - *"width of output"*: `20.0`
>        - *"height of output"*: `12.0`
>        - *"dpi of output"*: `200.0`
>    - Click Run Tool
>
>    > <comment-title> Column names and numbers </comment-title>

> >    > To provide ggplot2 with the data for the X- and Y-axis, column numbers must be passed to the function. You have to check which column numbers the columns `POS` and `REL.ALT` have. In addition, ggplot2 offers the option of to split the data according to `SAMPLE`, to obtain a separate plot for each value in SAMPLE. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>    > To provide ggplot2 with the data for the X- and Y-axis, column numbers must be passed to the function. You have to check which column numbers the columns `POS` and `REL.ALT` have. In addition, ggplot2 offers the option of splitting the data according to `SAMPLE`, to obtain a separate plot for each value in SAMPLE. 
```

![SNV plot](../../images/baculovirus-isolate-variation/snp_plot.png "Single nucleotide variant (SNV) plot of all variable positions in the sequenced CpGV isolates CpGV-E2 (top left), CpGV-M (top right), CpGV-S (bottom left) and CpGV-V15 (bottom right). Each point represents the relative frequency of the first alternative nucleotide (allele).")

# SNV Specificity Determination

> Now we come to the last but most complex section of this tutorial - determining SNV specificities. We have seen that CpGV-V15 is a mixed isolate. Now we want to find out which isolates were mixed and how this SNV pattern can be explained. In the next step, we will consider  SNV positions as markers and look for SNV positions that are only variable for one or more sequenced isolates of CpGV. If an SNV position is only variable for CpGV-S (i.e. the relative frequency is greater than 0; `REL.ALT > 0`) but is equal to zero for the other isolates, then this position is a marker for CpGV-S, or specific for CpGV-S. Since we cannot perform this determination by hand for all positions, I have written a small program implemented in the **Text reformatting with awk** tool that does the work for us. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Now we come to the last but most complex section of this tutorial - determining SNV specificities. We have seen that CpGV-V15 is a mixed isolate. Now we want to find out which isolates were mixed and how this SNV pattern can be explained. In the next step, we will consider  SNV positions as markers and look for SNV positions that are only variable for one or more sequenced isolates of CpGV. If a SNV position is only variable for CpGV-S (i.e. the relative frequency is greater than 0; `REL.ALT > 0`) but is equal to zero for the other isolates, then this position is a marker for CpGV-S, or specific for CpGV-S. Since we cannot perform this determination by hand for all positions, I have written a small program implemented in the **Text reformatting with awk** tool that does the work for us. 
```

> Now we come to the last but most complex section of this tutorial - determining SNV specificities. We have seen that CpGV-V15 is a mixed isolate. Now we want to find out which isolates were mixed and how this SNV pattern can be explained. In the next step, we will consider  SNV positions as markers  and look for SNV positions that are only variable for one or more sequenced isolates of CpGV. If an SNV position is only variable for CpGV-S (i.e. the relative frequency is greater than 0; `REL.ALT > 0`) but is equal to zero for the other isolates, then this position is a marker for CpGV-S, or specific for CpGV-S. Since we cannot perform this determination by hand for all positions, I have written a small program implemented in the **Text reformatting with awk** tool that does the work for us. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we come to the last but most complex section of this tutorial - determining SNV specificities. We have seen that CpGV-V15 is a mixed isolate. Now we want to find out which isolates were mixed and how this SNV pattern can be explained. In the next step, we will consider  SNV positions as markers and look for SNV positions that are only variable for one or more sequenced isolates of CpGV. If an SNV position is only variable for CpGV-S (i.e. the relative frequency is greater than 0; `REL.ALT > 0`) but is equal to zero for the other isolates, then this position is a marker for CpGV-S, or specific for CpGV-S. Since we cannot perform this determination by hand for all positions, I have written a small program implemented in the **Text reformatting with awk** tool that does the work for us. 
```

>            - *"column differentiating the different groups"*: `34`
>        - *"Axis title options"*: `Default`
>        - *"Axis text options"*: `Default`
>        - *"Plot title options"*: `Default`
>        - *"Grid lines"*: `Hide major and minor grid lines`
>        - *"Axis scaling"*: `Automatic axis scaling`
>    - In *"Output Options"*:
>        - *"Unit of output dimensions"*: `Centimeters (cm)`
>        - *"width of output"*: `30.0`
>        - *"height of output"*: `12.0`
>        - *"dpi of output"*: `200.0`
>    - Click Run Tool
>
{: .tip}

Although we have determined the SNV specificities using CpGV-M, CpGV-S and CpGV-E2, we can transfer this information to CpGV-V15 because all isolates were mapped against the common reference of CpGV-M. Because of this, we can look at the relative abundance of the CpGV-E2 and CpGV-S markers (= SNV positions) in the CpGV-V15 isolate. Let's look at the result for CpGV-V15 (Fig. 5).   

![SNV specificity plot for CpGV-V15](../../images/baculovirus-isolate-variation/SNV_specificity_plot_CpGV-V15.png  "Deciphering the composition of the isolate CpGV-V15 by using SNV specificities.")

> Most of the SNV positions specific for CpGV-E2 have a frequency around 0.5 (50%) (Fig. 5, SNV specificity: CpGV-E2). Looking at the positions specific for CpGV-S, we also see a SNV cloud at around 0.5 (50 %) (Fig. 5, SNV specificity: CpGV-S). From these two observations, we can conclude that CpGV-E2 and CpGV-S occur at a ratio of 50% each. As a control, we look at the markers (SNV positions) that are specific for both CpGV-E2 and CpGV-S (Fig. 5, SNV specificity: CpGV-E2 + CpGV-S). Here we see that most SNV positions have a relative frequency of ~1 (100%). This also makes sense, because if CpGV-V15 is a mixture of CpGV-E2 and CpGV-S, then the markers that indicate both isolates should be at 100%, which is the case. Based on the SNV analysis, it can be concluded that CpGV-V15 is mainly a mixture of CpGV-S and CpGV-E2.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Most of the SNV positions specific for CpGV-E2 have a frequency of around 0.5 (50%) (Fig. 5, SNV specificity: CpGV-E2). Looking at the positions specific to CpGV-S, we also see a SNV cloud at around 0.5 (50 %) (Fig. 5, SNV specificity: CpGV-S). From these two observations, we can conclude that CpGV-E2 and CpGV-S occur at a ratio of 50% each. As a control, we look at the markers (SNV positions) that are specific for both CpGV-E2 and CpGV-S (Fig. 5, SNV specificity: CpGV-E2 + CpGV-S). Here we see that most SNV positions have a relative frequency of ~1 (100%). This also makes sense, because if CpGV-V15 is a mixture of CpGV-E2 and CpGV-S, then the markers that indicate both isolates should be at 100%, which is the case. Based on the SNV analysis, it can be concluded that CpGV-V15 is mainly a mixture of CpGV-S and CpGV-E2.  
```

> >     }
> > }
> > ```
> {: .code-in}
>
>    - Click Run Tool
> 
>
{: .hands_on}

# Visualization of Variable SNV Positions by Specificity

Now, the VCF table has an additional column called `SPEC`, which indicates the SNV specificity for each position. This allows us to create a special SNV plot for each isolate. The special thing about this is that a separate plot is created for each isolate and each specificity. Since we can only look at each isolate individually, we first have to filter out the data for one isolate, we start with CpGV-S. After that, a plot is created for each SNV specificity for the CpGV-S isolate.  

> <hands-on-title> Extract data for one isolate only </hands-on-title>
>
> 1. {% tool [Filter data on any column using simple expressions](Filter1) %} with the following parameters:
>    - {% icon param-file %} *"Filter"*: the VCF table with determined SNV specificities; output of **Text reformatting with awk** {% icon tool %}
>    - *"With following condition"*: `c25=='CpGV-S'`
>    - *"Number of header lines to skip"*: `1`
>    - Click Run Tool
>
>    > <comment-title> Filtering the CpGV-S data </comment-title>
>    >

> >    > The VCF SNV table is reduced to the data of CpGV-S. This is done by filtering on column 23 (ISOLATE).

Reviewer 2: Just noticed that this comment talks about column 23, but you're configuring c25 in the hands-on.

---
layout: tutorial_hands_on

title: Deciphering Virus Populations - Single Nucleotide Variants (SNVs) and Specificities in Baculovirus Isolates
subtopic: 'one-health'
zenodo_link: ''
level: Intermediate
questions:
- How can the genetic variability of a baculovirus isolate be analysed?
- How can single nucleotide variants (SNVs) be identified across multiple isolates?
- How can SNVs be used as markers to analyse the composition of baculovirus isolates?
objectives:
- Understand the significance of SNVs.
- Determine variable SNV positions for multiple isolates using a common reference genome.
- Transform the output (VCF file) to a readable table format.
- Interpret the SNV data to analyse the intra-isolate variability of baculoviruses.

> - Learn to create your own sequence data and analyse it using the provided workflow and tool to explore the genetic variation.

Author: Statement removed.

The CpGV is one of the most well-studied baculoviruses because many isolates have been sequenced and sequence 
data sets are available at NCBI Genbank and NCBI SRA. We will use four CpGV isolates to decipher their 
intra-isolate specific variation and try to draw conclusions about the isolate's homogeneity or heterogeneity. 
We will also encounter a mixed isolate (a more or less clean mixture of other previously sequenced CpGV isolates) 
and learn how to recognize it. In addition, we will learn how to determine the composition 
of this mixed isolate based on other sequenced CpGV isolates.

> <comment-title> Detailed CpGV Isolate Information </comment-title>
>
> For those who want to delve deeper into the data sets, I have provided a table with links to NCBI SRA and related publications.
>
> | Isolate | NCBI Genbank | NCBI SRA | Reference |
> |:------------------:|:------------------:|:------------------:|:------------------:|
> | CpGV-M | KM217575 | [SRR31589148](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces?run=SRR31589148) | {% cite Wennmann2020 %}
> | CpGV-S | KM217573 | [SRR31589147](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces?run=SRR31589147) | {% cite Wennmann2020 %} |

> > | CpGV-E2 | KM217577 | [SRR31589146](https://trace.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/Traces?run=SRR31589146) | [Gueli Alletti et al. 2017](https://doi.org/10.3390/v9090250) |

Author: Overlooked missing citation added.
